Chapter 1
Smooth Manifolds
This book is about smooth manifolds. In the simplest terms, these are spaces that
locally look like some Euclidean space Rn, and on which one can do calculus. The
most familiar examples, aside from Euclidean spaces themselves, are smooth plane
curves such as circles and parabolas, and smooth surfaces such as spheres, tori,
paraboloids, ellipsoids, and hyperboloids. Higher-dimensional examples include the
set of points in RnC1 at a constant distance from the origin (an n-sphere) and graphs
of smooth maps between Euclidean spaces.
The simplest manifolds are the topological manifolds, which are topological
spaces with certain properties that encode what we mean when we say that they
“locally look like” Rn. Such spaces are studied intensively by topologists.
However, many (perhaps most) important applications of manifolds involve cal-
culus. For example, applications of manifold theory to geometry involve such prop-
erties as volume and curvature. Typically, volumes are computed by integration,
and curvatures are computed by differentiation, so to extend these ideas to mani-
folds would require some means of making sense of integration and differentiation
on a manifold. Applications to classical mechanics involve solving systems of or-
dinary differential equations on manifolds, and the applications to general relativity
(the theory of gravitation) involve solving a system of partial differential equations.
The first requirement for transferring the ideas of calculus to manifolds is some
notion of “smoothness.” For the simple examples of manifolds we described above,
all of which are subsets of Euclidean spaces, it is fairly easy to describe the mean-
ing of smoothness on an intuitive level. For example, we might want to call a curve
“smooth” if it has a tangent line that varies continuously from point to point, and
similarly a “smooth surface” should be one that has a tangent plane that varies con-
tinuously. But for more sophisticated applications it is an undue restriction to require
smooth manifolds to be subsets of some ambient Euclidean space. The ambient co-
ordinates and the vector space structure of Rn are superfluous data that often have
nothing to do with the problem at hand. It is a tremendous advantage to be able to
work with manifolds as abstract topological spaces, without the excess baggage of
such an ambient space. For example, in general relativity, spacetime is modeled as
a 4-dimensional smooth manifold that carries a certain geometric structure, called a
J.M. Lee, Introduction to Smooth Manifolds, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 218,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-9982-5_1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
1

Fig. 1.1 A homeomorphism from a circle to a square
Lorentz metric, whose curvature results in gravitational phenomena. In such a model
there is no physical meaning that can be assigned to any higher-dimensional ambient
space in which the manifold lives, and including such a space in the model would
complicate it needlessly. For such reasons, we need to think of smooth manifolds as
abstract topological spaces, not necessarily as subsets of larger spaces.
It is not hard to see that there is no way to define a purely topological property
that would serve as a criterion for “smoothness,” because it cannot be invariant under
homeomorphisms. For example, a circle and a square in the plane are homeomor-
phic topological spaces (Fig. 1.1), but we would probably all agree that the circle is
“smooth,” while the square is not. Thus, topological manifolds will not suffice for
our purposes. Instead, we will think of a smooth manifold as a set with two layers
of structure: first a topology, then a smooth structure.
In the first section of this chapter we describe the first of these structures. A topo-
logical manifold is a topological space with three special properties that express the
notion of being locally like Euclidean space. These properties are shared by Eu-
clidean spaces and by all of the familiar geometric objects that look locally like
Euclidean spaces, such as curves and surfaces. We then prove some important topo-
logical properties of manifolds that we use throughout the book.
In the next section we introduce an additional structure, called a smooth structure,
that can be added to a topological manifold to enable us to make sense of derivatives.
Following the basic definitions, we introduce a number of examples of manifolds,
so you can have something concrete in mind as you read the general theory. At the
end of the chapter we introduce the concept of a smooth manifold with boundary, an
important generalization of smooth manifolds that will have numerous applications
throughout the book, especially in our study of integration in Chapter 16.
Topological Manifolds
In this section we introduce topological manifolds, the most basic type of manifolds.
We assume that the reader is familiar with the definition and basic properties of
topological spaces, as summarized in Appendix A.
Suppose M is a topological space. We say that M is a topological manifold of
dimension n or a topological n-manifold if it has the following properties:

Topological Manifolds
3
 M is a Hausdorff space: for every pair of distinct points p;q 2 M; there are
disjoint open subsets U;V  M such that p 2 U and q 2 V .
 M is second-countable: there exists a countable basis for the topology of M .
 M is locally Euclidean of dimension n: each point of M has a neighborhood
that is homeomorphic to an open subset of Rn.
The third property means, more specifically, that for each p 2 M we can find
 an open subset U  M containing p,
 an open subset yU  Rn, and
 a homeomorphism 'W U ! yU .
I Exercise 1.1. Show that equivalent definitions of manifolds are obtained if instead
of allowing U to be homeomorphic to any open subset of Rn, we require it to be
homeomorphic to an open ball in Rn, or to Rn itself.
If M is a topological manifold, we often abbreviate the dimension of M as
dimM . Informally, one sometimes writes “Let M n be a manifold” as shorthand
for “Let M be a manifold of dimension n.” The superscript n is not part of the name
of the manifold, and is usually not included in the notation after the first occurrence.
It is important to note that every topological manifold has, by definition, a spe-
cific, well-defined dimension. Thus, we do not consider spaces of mixed dimension,
such as the disjoint union of a plane and a line, to be manifolds at all. In Chapter 17,
we will use the theory of de Rham cohomology to prove the following theorem,
which shows that the dimension of a (nonempty) topological manifold is in fact a
topological invariant.
Theorem 1.2 (Topological Invariance of Dimension). A nonempty n-dimensional
topological manifold cannot be homeomorphic to an m-dimensional manifold un-
less m D n.
For the proof, see Theorem 17.26. In Chapter 2, we will also prove a related but
weaker theorem (diffeomorphism invariance of dimension, Theorem 2.17). See also
[LeeTM, Chap. 13] for a different proof of Theorem 1.2 using singular homology
theory.
The empty set satisfies the definition of a topological n-manifold for every n. For
the most part, we will ignore this special case (sometimes without remembering to
say so). But because it is useful in certain contexts to allow the empty manifold, we
choose not to exclude it from the definition.
The basic example of a topological n-manifold is Rn itself. It is Hausdorff be-
cause it is a metric space, and it is second-countable because the set of all open balls
with rational centers and rational radii is a countable basis for its topology.
Requiring that manifolds share these properties helps to ensure that manifolds
behave in the ways we expect from our experience with Euclidean spaces. For ex-
ample, it is easy to verify that in a Hausdorff space, finite subsets are closed and
limits of convergent sequences are unique (see Exercise A.11 in Appendix A). The
motivation for second-countability is a bit less evident, but it will have important

Fig. 1.2 A coordinate chart
consequences throughout the book, mostly based on the existence of partitions of
unity (see Chapter 2).
In practice, both the Hausdorff and second-countability properties are usually
easy to check, especially for spaces that are built out of other manifolds, because
both properties are inherited by subspaces and finite products (Propositions A.17
and A.23). In particular, it follows that every open subset of a topological n-
manifold is itself a topological n-manifold (with the subspace topology, of course).
We should note that some authors choose to omit the Hausdorff property or
second-countability or both from the definition of manifolds. However, most of the
interesting results about manifolds do in fact require these properties, and it is ex-
ceedingly rare to encounter a space “in nature” that would be a manifold except for
the failure of one or the other of these hypotheses. For a couple of simple examples,
see Problems 1-1 and 1-2; for a more involved example (a connected, locally Eu-
clidean, Hausdorff space that is not second-countable), see [LeeTM, Problem 4-6].
Coordinate Charts
Let M be a topological n-manifold. A coordinate chart (or just a chart) on M is a
pair .U;'/, where U is an open subset of M and 'W U ! yU is a homeomorphism
from U to an open subset yU D '.U /  Rn (Fig. 1.2). By definition of a topological
manifold, each point p 2 M is contained in the domain of some chart .U;'/. If
'.p/ D 0, we say that the chart is centered at p. If .U;'/ is any chart whose domain
contains p, it is easy to obtain a new chart centered at p by subtracting the constant
vector '.p/.
Given a chart .U;'/, we call the set U a coordinate domain, or a coordinate
neighborhood of each of its points. If, in addition, '.U / is an open ball in Rn, then
U is called a coordinate ball; if '.U / is an open cube, U is a coordinate cube. The
map ' is called a (local) coordinate map, and the component functions

x1;:::;xn
of ', defined by '.p/ D

x1.p/;:::;xn.p/

, are called local coordinates on U .
We sometimes write things such as “.U;'/ is a chart containing p” as shorthand
for “.U;'/ is a chart whose domain U contains p.” If we wish to emphasize the

Topological Manifolds
5
coordinate functions

x1;:::;xn
instead of the coordinate map ', we sometimes
denote the chart by

U;

x1;:::;xn
or

U;

xi
.
Examples of Topological Manifolds
Here are some simple examples.
Example 1.3 (Graphs of Continuous Functions). Let U  Rn be an open subset,
and let f W U ! Rk be a continuous function. The graph of f is the subset of
Rn  Rk defined by
.f / D
˚
.x;y/ 2 Rn  Rk W x 2 U and y D f .x/

;
with the subspace topology. Let 1W Rn  Rk ! Rn denote the projection onto the
first factor, and let 'W .f / ! U be the restriction of 1 to .f /:
'.x;y/ D x;
.x;y/ 2 .f /:
Because ' is the restriction of a continuous map, it is continuous; and it is a home-
omorphism because it has a continuous inverse given by '1.x/ D .x;f .x//. Thus
.f / is a topological manifold of dimension n. In fact, .f / is homeomorphic
to U itself, and ..f /;'/ is a global coordinate chart, called graph coordinates.
The same observation applies to any subset of RnCk defined by setting any k of
the coordinates (not necessarily the last k) equal to some continuous function of the
other n, which are restricted to lie in an open subset of Rn.
//
Example 1.4 (Spheres). For each integer n  0, the unit n-sphere Sn is Hausdorff
and second-countable because it is a topological subspace of RnC1. To show that
it is locally Euclidean, for each index i D 1;:::;n C 1 let U C
i
denote the subset
of RnC1 where the ith coordinate is positive:
U C
i
D
˚
x1;:::;xnC1
2 RnC1 W xi > 0

:
(See Fig. 1.3.) Similarly, U 
i is the set where xi < 0.
Let f W Bn ! R be the continuous function
f .u/ D
p
1  juj2:
Then for each i D 1;:::;n C 1, it is easy to check that U C
i
\ Sn is the graph of the
function
xi D f

x1;:::; b
xi;:::;xnC1
;
where the hat indicates that xi is omitted. Similarly, U 
i \ Sn is the graph of
xi D f

x1;:::; b
xi;:::;xnC1
:
Thus, each subset U ˙
i
\ Sn is locally Euclidean of dimension n, and the maps
'˙
i W U ˙
i
\ Sn ! Bn given by
'˙
i

x1;:::;xnC1
D

x1;:::; b
xi;:::;xnC1

Fig. 1.3 Charts for Sn
are graph coordinates for Sn. Since each point of Sn is in the domain of at least one
of these 2n C 2 charts, Sn is a topological n-manifold.
//
Example 1.5 (Projective Spaces). The n-dimensional real projective space, de-
noted by RP n (or sometimes just P n), is defined as the set of 1-dimensional lin-
ear subspaces of RnC1, with the quotient topology determined by the natural map
 W RnC1 Xf0g ! RP n sending each point x 2 RnC1 Xf0g to the subspace spanned
by x. The 2-dimensional projective space RP 2 is called the projective plane. For
any point x 2 RnC1 X f0g, let Œx D .x/ 2 RP n denote the line spanned by x.
For each i D 1;:::;n C 1, let zUi  RnC1 X f0g be the set where xi ¤ 0,
and let Ui D 
 zUi

 RP n. Since zUi is a saturated open subset, Ui is open and
j z
Ui W zUi ! Ui is a quotient map (see Theorem A.27). Define a map 'i W Ui ! Rn
by
'i

x1;:::;xnC1
D
x1
xi ;:::; xi1
xi ; xiC1
xi ;:::; xnC1
xi

:
This map is well defined because its value is unchanged by multiplying x by a
nonzero constant. Because 'i ı  is continuous, 'i is continuous by the character-
istic property of quotient maps (Theorem A.27). In fact, 'i is a homeomorphism,
because it has a continuous inverse given by
'1
i

u1;:::;un
D

u1;:::;ui1;1;ui;:::;un
;
as you can check. Geometrically, '.Œx/ D u means .u;1/ is the point in RnC1
where the line Œx intersects the affine hyperplane where xi D 1 (Fig. 1.4). Be-
cause the sets U1;:::;UnC1 cover RP n, this shows that RP n is locally Eu-
clidean of dimension n. The Hausdorff and second-countability properties are left as
exercises.
//

Topological Manifolds
7
Fig. 1.4 A chart for RP n
I Exercise 1.6. Show that RP n is Hausdorff and second-countable, and is therefore
a topological n-manifold.
I Exercise 1.7. Show that RP n is compact. [Hint: show that the restriction of  to
Sn is surjective.]
Example 1.8 (Product Manifolds). Suppose M1;:::;Mk are topological mani-
folds of dimensions n1;:::;nk, respectively. The product space M1    Mk
is shown to be a topological manifold of dimension n1 C  C nk as follows. It
is Hausdorff and second-countable by Propositions A.17 and A.23, so only the
locally Euclidean property needs to be checked. Given any point .p1;:::;pk/ 2
M1 Mk, we can choose a coordinate chart .Ui;'i/ for each Mi with pi 2 Ui.
The product map
'1    'k W U1    Uk ! Rn1CCnk
is a homeomorphism onto its image, which is a product open subset of Rn1CCnk.
Thus, M1    Mk is a topological manifold of dimension n1 C  C nk, with
charts of the form .U1    Uk; '1    'k/.
//
Example 1.9 (Tori). For a positive integer n, the n-torus (plural: tori) is the product
space T n D S1    S1. By the discussion above, it is a topological n-manifold.
(The 2-torus is usually called simply the torus.)
//
Topological Properties of Manifolds
As topological spaces go, manifolds are quite special, because they share so many
important properties with Euclidean spaces. Here we discuss a few such properties
that will be of use to us throughout the book.
Most of the properties we discuss in this section depend on the fact that every
manifold possesses a particularly well-behaved basis for its topology.
Lemma 1.10. Every topological manifold has a countable basis of precompact co-
ordinate balls.

Proof. Let M be a topological n-manifold. First we consider the special case in
which M can be covered by a single chart. Suppose 'W M ! yU  Rn is a global
coordinate map, and let B be the collection of all open balls Br.x/  Rn such that
r is rational, x has rational coordinates, and Br0.x/  yU for some r0 > r. Each such
ball is precompact in yU , and it is easy to check that B is a countable basis for the
topology of yU . Because ' is a homeomorphism, it follows that the collection of sets
of the form '1.B/ for B 2 B is a countable basis for the topology of M; consisting
of precompact coordinate balls, with the restrictions of ' as coordinate maps.
Now let M be an arbitrary n-manifold. By definition, each point of M is in
the domain of a chart. Because every open cover of a second-countable space has
a countable subcover (Proposition A.16), M is covered by countably many charts
f.Ui;'i/g. By the argument in the preceding paragraph, each coordinate domain Ui
has a countable basis of coordinate balls that are precompact in Ui, and the union of
all these countable bases is a countable basis for the topology of M. If V  Ui is one
of these balls, then the closure of V in Ui is compact, and because M is Hausdorff,
it is closed in M . It follows that the closure of V in M is the same as its closure in
Ui, so V is precompact in M as well.

Connectivity
The existence of a basis of coordinate balls has important consequences for the
connectivity properties of manifolds. Recall that a topological space X is
 connected if there do not exist two disjoint, nonempty, open subsets of X whose
union is X;
 path-connected if every pair of points in X can be joined by a path in X; and
 locally path-connected if X has a basis of path-connected open subsets.
(See Appendix A.) The following proposition shows that connectivity and path con-
nectivity coincide for manifolds.
Proposition 1.11. Let M be a topological manifold.
(a) M is locally path-connected.
(b) M is connected if and only if it is path-connected.
(c) The components of M are the same as its path components.
(d) M has countably many components, each of which is an open subset of M and
a connected topological manifold.
Proof. Since each coordinate ball is path-connected, (a) follows from the fact that
M has a basis of coordinate balls. Parts (b) and (c) are immediate consequences of
(a) and Proposition A.43. To prove (d), note that each component is open in M by
Proposition A.43, so the collection of components is an open cover of M . Because
M is second-countable, this cover must have a countable subcover. But since the
components are all disjoint, the cover must have been countable to begin with, which
is to say that M has only countably many components. Because the components are
open, they are connected topological manifolds in the subspace topology.


Topological Manifolds
9
Local Compactness and Paracompactness
The next topological property of manifolds that we need is local compactness (see
Appendix A for the definition).
Proposition 1.12 (Manifolds Are Locally Compact). Every topological manifold
is locally compact.
Proof. Lemma 1.10 showed that every manifold has a basis of precompact open
subsets.

Another key topological property possessed by manifolds is called paracompact-
ness. It is a consequence of local compactness and second-countability, and in fact
is one of the main reasons why second-countability is included in the definition of
manifolds.
Let M be a topological space. A collection X of subsets of M is said to be locally
finite if each point of M has a neighborhood that intersects at most finitely many
of the sets in X. Given a cover U of M; another cover V is called a refinement of
U if for each V 2 V there exists some U 2 U such that V  U . We say that M is
paracompact if every open cover of M admits an open, locally finite refinement.
Lemma 1.13. Suppose X is a locally finite collection of subsets of a topological
space M .
(a) The collection
˚ x
X W X 2 X

is also locally finite.
(b) S
X2X X D S
X2X x
X.
I Exercise 1.14. Prove the preceding lemma.
Theorem 1.15 (Manifolds Are Paracompact). Every topological manifold is
paracompact. In fact, given a topological manifold M; an open cover X of M;
and any basis B for the topology of M; there exists a countable, locally finite open
refinement of X consisting of elements of B.
Proof. Given M; X, and B as in the hypothesis of the theorem, let .Kj /1
jD1 be an
exhaustion of M by compact sets (Proposition A.60). For each j , let Vj D KjC1 X
IntKj and Wj D IntKjC2 X Kj1 (where we interpret Kj as ¿ if j < 1). Then
Vj is a compact set contained in the open subset Wj . For each x 2 Vj , there is
some Xx 2 X containing x, and because B is a basis, there exists Bx 2 B such
that x 2 Bx  Xx \ Wj . The collection of all such sets Bx as x ranges over Vj
is an open cover of Vj , and thus has a finite subcover. The union of all such finite
subcovers as j ranges over the positive integers is a countable open cover of M
that refines X. Because the finite subcover of Vj consists of sets contained in Wj ,
and Wj \ Wj 0 D ¿ except when j  2  j 0  j C 2, the resulting cover is locally
finite.

Problem 1-5 shows that, at least for connected spaces, paracompactness can be
used as a substitute for second-countability in the definition of manifolds.

Fundamental Groups of Manifolds
The following result about fundamental groups of manifolds will be important in
our study of covering manifolds in Chapter 4. For a brief review of the fundamental
group, see Appendix A.
Proposition 1.16. The fundamental group of a topological manifold is countable.
Proof. Let M be a topological manifold. By Lemma 1.10, there is a countable
collection B of coordinate balls covering M . For any pair of coordinate balls
B;B0 2 B, the intersection B \ B0 has at most countably many components, each
of which is path-connected. Let X be a countable set containing a point from each
component of B \ B0 for each B;B0 2 B (including B D B0). For each B 2 B and
each x;x0 2 X such that x;x0 2 B, let hB
x;x0 be some path from x to x0 in B.
Since the fundamental groups based at any two points in the same component
of M are isomorphic, and X contains at least one point in each component of M;
we may as well choose a point p 2 X as base point. Define a special loop to be a
loop based at p that is equal to a finite product of paths of the form hB
x;x0. Clearly,
the set of special loops is countable, and each special loop determines an element
of 1.M;p/. To show that 1.M;p/ is countable, therefore, it suffices to show that
each element of 1.M;p/ is represented by a special loop.
Suppose f W Œ0;1 ! M is a loop based at p. The collection of components of
sets of the form f 1.B/ as B ranges over B is an open cover of Œ0;1, so by
compactness it has a finite subcover. Thus, there are finitely many numbers 0 D
a0 < a1 <  < ak D 1 such that Œai1;ai  f 1.B/ for some B  B. For each
i, let fi be the restriction of f to the interval Œai1;ai, reparametrized so that its
domain is Œ0;1, and let Bi 2 B be a coordinate ball containing the image of fi.
For each i, we have f .ai/ 2 Bi \ BiC1, and there is some xi 2 X that lies in the
same component of Bi \ BiC1 as f .ai/. Let gi be a path in Bi \ BiC1 from xi to
f .ai/ (Fig. 1.5), with the understanding that x0 D xk D p, and g0 and gk are both
equal to the constant path cp based at p. Then, because xgi  gi is path-homotopic to
a constant path (where xgi.t/ D gi.1  t/ is the reverse path of gi),
f 	 f1   fk
	 g0  f1  xg1  g1  f2  xg2   xgk1  gk1  fk  xgk
	 z
f1  z
f2   z
fk;
where z
fi D gi1  fi  xgi. For each i, z
fi is a path in Bi from xi1 to xi. Since
Bi is simply connected, z
fi is path-homotopic to hBi
xi1;xi . It follows that f is path-
homotopic to a special loop, as claimed.

Smooth Structures
The definition of manifolds that we gave in the preceding section is sufficient for
studying topological properties of manifolds, such as compactness, connectedness,

Smooth Structures
11
Fig. 1.5 The fundamental group of a manifold is countable
simple connectivity, and the problem of classifying manifolds up to homeomor-
phism. However, in the entire theory of topological manifolds there is no men-
tion of calculus. There is a good reason for this: however we might try to make
sense of derivatives of functions on a manifold, such derivatives cannot be in-
variant under homeomorphisms. For example, the map 'W R2 ! R2 given by
'.u;v/ D

u1=3;v1=3
is a homeomorphism, and it is easy to construct differen-
tiable functions f W R2 ! R such that f ı ' is not differentiable at the origin. (The
function f .x;y/ D x is one such.)
To make sense of derivatives of real-valued functions, curves, or maps between
manifolds, we need to introduce a new kind of manifold called a smooth manifold. It
will be a topological manifold with some extra structure in addition to its topology,
which will allow us to decide which functions to or from the manifold are smooth.
The definition will be based on the calculus of maps between Euclidean spaces,
so let us begin by reviewing some basic terminology about such maps. If U and
V are open subsets of Euclidean spaces Rn and Rm, respectively, a function
F W U ! V is said to be smooth (or C 1, or infinitely differentiable) if each of
its component functions has continuous partial derivatives of all orders. If in addi-
tion F is bijective and has a smooth inverse map, it is called a diffeomorphism.
A diffeomorphism is, in particular, a homeomorphism.
A review of some important properties of smooth maps is given in Appendix C.
You should be aware that some authors define the word smooth differently—for
example, to mean continuously differentiable or merely differentiable. On the other
hand, some use the word differentiable to mean what we call smooth. Throughout
this book, smooth is synonymous with C 1.
To see what additional structure on a topological manifold might be appropriate
for discerning which maps are smooth, consider an arbitrary topological n-mani-
fold M . Each point in M is in the domain of a coordinate map 'W U ! yU  Rn.

Fig. 1.6 A transition map
A plausible definition of a smooth function on M would be to say that f W M ! R is
smooth if and only if the composite function f ı'1W yU ! R is smooth in the sense
of ordinary calculus. But this will make sense only if this property is independent of
the choice of coordinate chart. To guarantee this independence, we will restrict our
attention to “smooth charts.” Since smoothness is not a homeomorphism-invariant
property, the way to do this is to consider the collection of all smooth charts as a
new kind of structure on M .
With this motivation in mind, we now describe the details of the construction.
Let M be a topological n-manifold. If .U;'/, .V; / are two charts such that
U \ V ¤ ¿, the composite map  ı '1W '.U \ V / !  .U \ V / is called the
transition map from ' to  (Fig. 1.6). It is a composition of homeomorphisms, and
is therefore itself a homeomorphism. Two charts .U;'/ and .V; / are said to be
smoothly compatible if either U \ V D ¿ or the transition map  ı '1 is a dif-
feomorphism. Since '.U \ V / and  .U \ V / are open subsets of Rn, smoothness
of this map is to be interpreted in the ordinary sense of having continuous partial
derivatives of all orders.
We define an atlas for M to be a collection of charts whose domains cover M .
An atlas A is called a smooth atlas if any two charts in A are smoothly compatible
with each other.
To show that an atlas is smooth, we need only verify that each transition map
 ı'1 is smooth whenever .U;'/ and .V; / are charts in A; once we have proved
this, it follows that  ı '1 is a diffeomorphism because its inverse

 ı '11 D
' ı  1 is one of the transition maps we have already shown to be smooth. Alterna-
tively, given two particular charts .U;'/ and .V; /, it is often easiest to show that

Smooth Structures
13
they are smoothly compatible by verifying that  ı'1 is smooth and injective with
nonsingular Jacobian at each point, and appealing to Corollary C.36.
Our plan is to define a “smooth structure” on M by giving a smooth atlas, and to
define a function f W M ! R to be smooth if and only if f ı '1 is smooth in the
sense of ordinary calculus for each coordinate chart .U;'/ in the atlas. There is one
minor technical problem with this approach: in general, there will be many possible
atlases that give the “same” smooth structure, in that they all determine the same
collection of smooth functions on M . For example, consider the following pair of
atlases on Rn:
A1 D
˚
Rn;IdRn 
;
A2 D
˚
B1.x/;IdB1.x/

W x 2 Rn
:
Although these are different smooth atlases, clearly a function f W Rn ! R is
smooth with respect to either atlas if and only if it is smooth in the sense of or-
dinary calculus.
We could choose to define a smooth structure as an equivalence class of smooth
atlases under an appropriate equivalence relation. However, it is more straightfor-
ward to make the following definition: a smooth atlas A on M is maximal if it is
not properly contained in any larger smooth atlas. This just means that any chart that
is smoothly compatible with every chart in A is already in A. (Such a smooth atlas
is also said to be complete.)
Now we can define the main concept of this chapter. If M is a topological mani-
fold, a smooth structure on M is a maximal smooth atlas. A smooth manifold is a
pair .M;A/, where M is a topological manifold and A is a smooth structure on M .
When the smooth structure is understood, we usually omit mention of it and just say
“M is a smooth manifold.” Smooth structures are also called differentiable struc-
tures or C 1 structures by some authors. We also use the term smooth manifold
structure to mean a manifold topology together with a smooth structure.
We emphasize that a smooth structure is an additional piece of data that must
be added to a topological manifold before we are entitled to talk about a “smooth
manifold.” In fact, a given topological manifold may have many different smooth
structures (see Example 1.23 and Problem 1-6). On the other hand, it is not always
possible to find a smooth structure on a given topological manifold: there exist topo-
logical manifolds that admit no smooth structures at all. (The first example was a
compact 10-dimensional manifold found in 1960 by Michel Kervaire [Ker60].)
It is generally not very convenient to define a smooth structure by explicitly de-
scribing a maximal smooth atlas, because such an atlas contains very many charts.
Fortunately, we need only specify some smooth atlas, as the next proposition shows.
Proposition 1.17. Let M be a topological manifold.
(a) Every smooth atlas A for M is contained in a unique maximal smooth atlas,
called the smooth structure determined by A.
(b) Two smooth atlases for M determine the same smooth structure if and only if
their union is a smooth atlas.

Fig. 1.7 Proof of Proposition 1.17(a)
Proof. Let A be a smooth atlas for M; and let S
A denote the set of all charts that
are smoothly compatible with every chart in A. To show that S
A is a smooth atlas,
we need to show that any two charts of S
A are smoothly compatible with each other,
which is to say that for any .U;'/, .V; / 2 S
A, the map  ı '1W '.U \ V / !
 .U \ V / is smooth.
Let x D '.p/ 2 '.U \ V / be arbitrary. Because the domains of the charts in A
cover M; there is some chart .W;/ 2 A such that p 2 W (Fig. 1.7). Since every
chart in S
A is smoothly compatible with .W;/, both of the maps  ı'1 and  ı1
are smooth where they are defined. Since p 2 U \V \W , it follows that  ı'1 D

 ı1
ı

 ı'1
is smooth on a neighborhood of x. Thus,  ı'1 is smooth in
a neighborhood of each point in '.U \V /. Therefore, S
A is a smooth atlas. To check
that it is maximal, just note that any chart that is smoothly compatible with every
chart in S
A must in particular be smoothly compatible with every chart in A, so it is
already in S
A. This proves the existence of a maximal smooth atlas containing A. If
B is any other maximal smooth atlas containing A, each of its charts is smoothly
compatible with each chart in A, so B  S
A. By maximality of B, B D S
A.
The proof of (b) is left as an exercise.

I Exercise 1.18. Prove Proposition 1.17(b).
For example, if a topological manifold M can be covered by a single chart, the
smooth compatibility condition is trivially satisfied, so any such chart automatically
determines a smooth structure on M .
It is worth mentioning that the notion of smooth structure can be generalized
in several different ways by changing the compatibility requirement for charts.
For example, if we replace the requirement that charts be smoothly compatible by
the weaker requirement that each transition map  ı '1 (and its inverse) be of

Smooth Structures
15
class C k, we obtain the definition of a C k structure. Similarly, if we require that
each transition map be real-analytic (i.e., expressible as a convergent power series in
a neighborhood of each point), we obtain the definition of a real-analytic structure,
also called a C ! structure. If M has even dimension n D 2m, we can identify R2m
with Cm and require that the transition maps be complex-analytic; this determines
a complex-analytic structure. A manifold endowed with one of these structures is
called a C k manifold, real-analytic manifold, or complex manifold, respectively.
(Note that a C 0 manifold is just a topological manifold.) We do not treat any of these
other kinds of manifolds in this book, but they play important roles in analysis, so it
is useful to know the definitions.
Local Coordinate Representations
If M is a smooth manifold, any chart .U;'/ contained in the given maximal smooth
atlas is called a smooth chart, and the corresponding coordinate map ' is called a
smooth coordinate map. It is useful also to introduce the terms smooth coordinate
domain or smooth coordinate neighborhood for the domain of a smooth coordinate
chart. A smooth coordinate ball means a smooth coordinate domain whose image
under a smooth coordinate map is a ball in Euclidean space. A smooth coordinate
cube is defined similarly.
It is often useful to restrict attention to coordinate balls whose closures sit nicely
inside larger coordinate balls. We say a set B  M is a regular coordinate ball if
there is a smooth coordinate ball B0 
 xB and a smooth coordinate map 'W B0 ! Rn
such that for some positive real numbers r < r0,
'.B/ D Br.0/;
'
 xB

D xBr.0/;
and
'

B0
D Br0.0/:
Because xB is homeomorphic to xBr.0/, it is compact, and thus every regular coordi-
nate ball is precompact in M . The next proposition gives a slight improvement on
Lemma 1.10 for smooth manifolds. Its proof is a straightforward adaptation of the
proof of that lemma.
Proposition 1.19. Every smooth manifold has a countable basis of regular coordi-
nate balls.
I Exercise 1.20. Prove Proposition 1.19.
Here is how one usually thinks about coordinate charts on a smooth manifold.
Once we choose a smooth chart .U;'/ on M; the coordinate map 'W U ! yU  Rn
can be thought of as giving a temporary identification between U and yU . Using this
identification, while we work in this chart, we can think of U simultaneously as an
open subset of M and as an open subset of Rn. You can visualize this identification
by thinking of a “grid” drawn on U representing the preimages of the coordinate
lines under ' (Fig. 1.8). Under this identification, we can represent a point p 2
U by its coordinates

x1;:::;xn
D '.p/, and think of this n-tuple as being the

Fig. 1.8 A coordinate grid
point p. We typically express this by saying “

x1;:::;xn
is the (local) coordinate
representation for p” or “p D

x1;:::;xn
in local coordinates.”
Another way to look at it is that by means of our identification U $ yU , we can
think of ' as the identity map and suppress it from the notation. This takes a bit
of getting used to, but the payoff is a huge simplification of the notation in many
situations. You just need to remember that the identification is in general only local,
and depends heavily on the choice of coordinate chart.
You are probably already used to such identifications from your study of mul-
tivariable calculus. The most common example is polar coordinates .r;/ in
the plane, defined implicitly by the relation .x;y/ D .r cos;r sin/ (see Exam-
ple C.37). On an appropriate open subset such as U D f.x;y/ W x > 0g  R2, .r;/
can be expressed as smooth functions of .x;y/, and the map that sends .x;y/ to
the corresponding .r;/ is a smooth coordinate map with respect to the standard
smooth structure on R2. Using this map, we can write a given point p 2 U either as
p D .x;y/ in standard coordinates or as p D .r;/ in polar coordinates, where the
two coordinate representations are related by .r;/ D
p
x2 C y2;tan1 y=x

and
.x;y/ D .r cos;r sin/. Other polar coordinate charts can be obtained by restrict-
ing .r;/ to other open subsets of R2 X f0g.
The fact that manifolds do not come with any predetermined choice of coordi-
nates is both a blessing and a curse. The flexibility to choose coordinates more or
less arbitrarily can be a big advantage in approaching problems in manifold the-
ory, because the coordinates can often be chosen to simplify some aspect of the
problem at hand. But we pay for this flexibility by being obliged to ensure that any
objects we wish to define globally on a manifold are not dependent on a particular
choice of coordinates. There are generally two ways of doing this: either by writing
down a coordinate-dependent definition and then proving that the definition gives
the same results in any coordinate chart, or by writing down a definition that is man-
ifestly coordinate-independent (often called an invariant definition). We will use the
coordinate-dependent approach in a few circumstances where it is notably simpler,
but for the most part we will give coordinate-free definitions whenever possible.
The need for such definitions accounts for much of the abstraction of modern man-
ifold theory. One of the most important skills you will need to acquire in order to
use manifold theory effectively is an ability to switch back and forth easily between
invariant descriptions and their coordinate counterparts.

Examples of Smooth Manifolds
17
Examples of Smooth Manifolds
Before proceeding further with the general theory, let us survey some examples of
smooth manifolds.
Example 1.21 (0-Dimensional Manifolds). A topological manifold M of dimen-
sion 0 is just a countable discrete space. For each point p 2 M; the only neighbor-
hood of p that is homeomorphic to an open subset of R0 is fpg itself, and there is
exactly one coordinate map 'W fpg ! R0. Thus, the set of all charts on M trivially
satisfies the smooth compatibility condition, and each 0-dimensional manifold has
a unique smooth structure.
//
Example 1.22 (Euclidean Spaces). For each nonnegative integer n, the Euclidean
space Rn is a smooth n-manifold with the smooth structure determined by the atlas
consisting of the single chart .Rn;IdRn/. We call this the standard smooth structure
on Rn and the resulting coordinate map standard coordinates. Unless we explic-
itly specify otherwise, we always use this smooth structure on Rn. With respect to
this smooth structure, the smooth coordinate charts for Rn are exactly those charts
.U;'/ such that ' is a diffeomorphism (in the sense of ordinary calculus) from U
to another open subset yU  Rn.
//
Example 1.23 (Another Smooth Structure on R). Consider the homeomorphism
 W R ! R given by
 .x/ D x3:
(1.1)
The atlas consisting of the single chart .R; / defines a smooth structure on R.
This chart is not smoothly compatible with the standard smooth structure, because
the transition map IdR ı 1.y/ D y1=3 is not smooth at the origin. Therefore, the
smooth structure defined on R by  is not the same as the standard one. Using
similar ideas, it is not hard to construct many distinct smooth structures on any given
positive-dimensional topological manifold, as long as it has one smooth structure to
begin with (see Problem 1-6).
//
Example 1.24 (Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces). Let V be a finite-dimensional
real vector space. Any norm on V determines a topology, which is independent
of the choice of norm (Exercise B.49). With this topology, V is a topological n-
manifold, and has a natural smooth structure defined as follows. Each (ordered)
basis .E1;:::;En/ for V defines a basis isomorphism E W Rn ! V by
E.x/ D
n
X
iD1
xiEi:
This map is a homeomorphism, so

V;E1
is a chart. If
 zE1;:::; zEn

is any other
basis and zE.x/ D P
j xj zEj is the corresponding isomorphism, then there is some
invertible matrix

Aj
i

such that Ei D P
j Aj
i zEj for each i. The transition map
between the two charts is then given by zE1 ı E.x/ D zx, where zx D

zx1;:::; zxn

is determined by
n
X
jD1
zxj zEj D
n
X
iD1
xiEi D
n
X
i;jD1
xiAj
i zEj :
It follows that zxj D P
i Aj
i xi. Thus, the map sending x to zx is an invertible linear
map and hence a diffeomorphism, so any two such charts are smoothly compatible.
The collection of all such charts thus defines a smooth structure, called the standard
smooth structure on V .
//
The Einstein Summation Convention
This is a good place to pause and introduce an important notational convention that
is commonly used in the study of smooth manifolds. Because of the proliferation
of summations such as P
i xiEi in this subject, we often abbreviate such a sum by
omitting the summation sign, as in
E.x/ D xiEi;
an abbreviation for E.x/ D
n
X
iD1
xiEi:
We interpret any such expression according to the following rule, called the Einstein
summation convention: if the same index name (such as i in the expression above)
appears exactly twice in any monomial term, once as an upper index and once as
a lower index, that term is understood to be summed over all possible values of
that index, generally from 1 to the dimension of the space in question. This simple
idea was introduced by Einstein to reduce the complexity of expressions arising
in the study of smooth manifolds by eliminating the necessity of explicitly writing
summation signs. We use the summation convention systematically throughout the
book (except in the appendices, which many readers will look at before the rest of
the book).
Another important aspect of the summation convention is the positions of the
indices. We always write basis vectors (such as Ei) with lower indices, and com-
ponents of a vector with respect to a basis (such as xi) with upper indices. These
index conventions help to ensure that, in summations that make mathematical sense,
each index to be summed over typically appears twice in any given term, once as a
lower index and once as an upper index. Any index that is implicitly summed over
is a “dummy index,” meaning that the value of such an expression is unchanged if a
different name is substituted for each dummy index. For example, xiEi and xj Ej
mean exactly the same thing.
Since the coordinates of a point

x1;:::;xn
2 Rn are also its components with
respect to the standard basis, in order to be consistent with our convention of writing
components of vectors with upper indices, we need to use upper indices for these co-
ordinates, and we do so throughout this book. Although this may seem awkward at
first, in combination with the summation convention it offers enormous advantages

Examples of Smooth Manifolds
19
when we work with complicated indexed sums, not the least of which is that expres-
sions that are not mathematically meaningful often betray themselves quickly by
violating the index convention. (The main exceptions are expressions involving the
Euclidean dot product x  y D P
i xiyi, in which the same index appears twice in
the upper position, and the standard symplectic form on R2n, which we will define
in Chapter 22. We always explicitly write summation signs in such expressions.)
More Examples
Now we continue with our examples of smooth manifolds.
Example 1.25 (Spaces of Matrices). Let M.m  n;R/ denote the set of m  n
matrices with real entries. Because it is a real vector space of dimension mn under
matrix addition and scalar multiplication, M.mn;R/ is a smooth mn-dimensional
manifold. (In fact, it is often useful to identify M.m  n;R/ with Rmn, just by
stringing all the matrix entries out in a single row.) Similarly, the space M.mn;C/
of m  n complex matrices is a vector space of dimension 2mn over R, and thus
a smooth manifold of dimension 2mn. In the special case in which m D n (square
matrices), we abbreviate M.n  n;R/ and M.n  n;C/ by M.n;R/ and M.n;C/,
respectively.
//
Example 1.26 (Open Submanifolds). Let U be any open subset of Rn. Then U is
a topological n-manifold, and the single chart .U;IdU / defines a smooth structure
on U .
More generally, let M be a smooth n-manifold and let U  M be any open
subset. Define an atlas on U by
AU D
˚
smooth charts .V;'/ for M such that V  U

:
Every point p 2 U is contained in the domain of some chart .W;'/ for M ; if we set
V D W \ U , then .V;'jV / is a chart in AU whose domain contains p. Therefore,
U is covered by the domains of charts in AU , and it is easy to verify that this is
a smooth atlas for U . Thus any open subset of M is itself a smooth n-manifold
in a natural way. Endowed with this smooth structure, we call any open subset an
open submanifold of M. (We will define a more general class of submanifolds in
Chapter 5.)
//
Example 1.27 (The General Linear Group). The general linear group GL.n;R/
is the set of invertible nn matrices with real entries. It is a smooth n2-dimensional
manifold because it is an open subset of the n2-dimensional vector space M.n;R/,
namely the set where the (continuous) determinant function is nonzero.
//
Example 1.28 (Matrices of Full Rank). The previous example has a natural gener-
alization to rectangular matrices of full rank. Suppose m < n, and let Mm.mn;R/
denote the subset of M.m  n;R/ consisting of matrices of rank m. If A is an ar-
bitrary such matrix, the fact that rankA D m means that A has some nonsingular
m  m submatrix. By continuity of the determinant function, this same submatrix

has nonzero determinant on a neighborhood of A in M.m  n;R/, which implies
that A has a neighborhood contained in Mm.m  n;R/. Thus, Mm.m  n;R/ is an
open subset of M.m  n;R/, and therefore is itself a smooth mn-dimensional man-
ifold. A similar argument shows that Mn.m  n;R/ is a smooth mn-manifold when
n < m.
//
Example 1.29 (Spaces of Linear Maps). Suppose V and W are finite-dimensional
real vector spaces, and let L.V IW / denote the set of linear maps from V to W . Then
because L.V IW / is itself a finite-dimensional vector space (whose dimension is the
product of the dimensions of V and W ), it has a natural smooth manifold structure
as in Example 1.24. One way to put global coordinates on it is to choose bases for V
and W , and represent each T 2 L.V IW / by its matrix, which yields an isomorphism
of L.V IW / with M.m  n;R/ for m D dimW and n D dimV .
//
Example 1.30 (Graphs of Smooth Functions). If U  Rn is an open subset and
f W U ! Rk is a smooth function, we have already observed above (Example 1.3)
that the graph of f is a topological n-manifold in the subspace topology. Since
.f / is covered by the single graph coordinate chart 'W .f / ! U (the restriction
of 1), we can put a canonical smooth structure on .f / by declaring the graph
coordinate chart ..f /;'/ to be a smooth chart.
//
Example 1.31 (Spheres). We showed in Example 1.4 that the n-sphere Sn  RnC1
is a topological n-manifold. We put a smooth structure on Sn as follows. For each
i D 1;:::;n C 1, let

U ˙
i ;'˙
i

denote the graph coordinate charts we constructed
in Example 1.4. For any distinct indices i and j , the transition map '˙
i ı

'˙
j
1 is
easily computed. In the case i < j , we get
'˙
i ı

'˙
j
1 
u1;:::;un
D
	
u1;:::; b
ui;:::;˙
p
1  juj2;:::;un
(with the square root in the j th position), and a similar formula holds when i > j .
When i D j , an even simpler computation gives 'C
i ı

'
i
1 D '
i ı

'C
i
1 D
IdBn. Thus, the collection of charts
˚
U ˙
i ;'˙
i

is a smooth atlas, and so defines a
smooth structure on Sn. We call this its standard smooth structure.
//
Example 1.32 (Level Sets). The preceding example can be generalized as fol-
lows. Suppose U  Rn is an open subset and ˚ W U ! R is a smooth function.
For any c 2 R, the set ˚1.c/ is called a level set of ˚. Choose some c 2 R, let
M D ˚1.c/, and suppose it happens that the total derivative D˚.a/ is nonzero
for each a 2 ˚1.c/. Because D˚.a/ is a row matrix whose entries are the partial
derivatives .@˚=@x1.a/;:::;@˚=@xn.a//, for each a 2 M there is some i such that
@˚=@xi.a/ ¤ 0. It follows from the implicit function theorem (Theorem C.40, with
xi playing the role of y) that there is a neighborhood U0 of a such that M \ U0 can
be expressed as a graph of an equation of the form
xi D f
	
x1;:::; b
xi;:::;xn
;
for some smooth real-valued function f defined on an open subset of Rn1. There-
fore, arguing just as in the case of the n-sphere, we see that M is a topological

Examples of Smooth Manifolds
21
manifold of dimension .n  1/, and has a smooth structure such that each of the
graph coordinate charts associated with a choice of f as above is a smooth chart.
In Chapter 5, we will develop the theory of smooth submanifolds, which is a far-
reaching generalization of this construction.
//
Example 1.33 (Projective Spaces). The n-dimensional real projective space RP n
is a topological n-manifold by Example 1.5. Let us check that the coordinate charts
.Ui;'i/ constructed in that example are all smoothly compatible. Assuming for con-
venience that i > j , it is straightforward to compute that
'j ı '1
i

u1;:::;un
D
u1
uj ;:::; uj1
uj ; ujC1
uj ;:::; ui1
uj ; 1
uj ; ui
uj ;:::; un
uj

;
which is a diffeomorphism from 'i.Ui \ Uj / to 'j .Ui \ Uj /.
//
Example 1.34 (Smooth Product Manifolds). If M1;:::;Mk are smooth manifolds
of dimensions n1;:::;nk, respectively, we showed in Example 1.8 that the product
space M1    Mk is a topological manifold of dimension n1 C  C nk, with
charts of the form .U1    Uk;'1    'k/. Any two such charts are smoothly
compatible because, as is easily verified,
. 1     k/ ı .'1    'k/1 D

 1 ı '1
1

  

 k ı '1
k

;
which is a smooth map. This defines a natural smooth manifold structure on the
product, called the product smooth manifold structure. For example, this yields a
smooth manifold structure on the n-torus T n D S1    S1.
//
In each of the examples we have seen so far, we constructed a smooth manifold
structure in two stages: we started with a topological space and checked that it was
a topological manifold, and then we specified a smooth structure. It is often more
convenient to combine these two steps into a single construction, especially if we
start with a set that is not already equipped with a topology. The following lemma
provides a shortcut—it shows how, given a set with suitable “charts” that overlap
smoothly, we can use the charts to define both a topology and a smooth structure on
the set.
Lemma 1.35 (Smooth Manifold Chart Lemma). Let M be a set, and suppose we
are given a collection fU˛g of subsets of M together with maps '˛ W U˛ ! Rn, such
that the following properties are satisfied:
(i) For each ˛, '˛ is a bijection between U˛ and an open subset '˛.U˛/  Rn.
(ii) For each ˛ and ˇ, the sets '˛.U˛ \ Uˇ/ and 'ˇ.U˛ \ Uˇ/ are open in Rn.
(iii) Whenever U˛ \ Uˇ ¤ ¿, the map 'ˇ ı '1
˛ W '˛.U˛ \ Uˇ/ ! 'ˇ.U˛ \ Uˇ/ is
smooth.
(iv) Countably many of the sets U˛ cover M .
(v) Whenever p;q are distinct points in M; either there exists some U˛ containing
both p and q or there exist disjoint sets U˛;Uˇ with p 2 U˛ and q 2 Uˇ.
Then M has a unique smooth manifold structure such that each .U˛;'˛/ is a smooth
chart.

Fig. 1.9 The smooth manifold chart lemma
Proof. We define the topology by taking all sets of the form '1
˛ .V /, with V an
open subset of Rn, as a basis. To prove that this is a basis for a topology, we need to
show that for any point p in the intersection of two basis sets '1
˛ .V / and '1
ˇ .W /,
there is a third basis set containing p and contained in the intersection. It suffices
to show that '1
˛ .V / \ '1
ˇ .W / is itself a basis set (Fig. 1.9). To see this, observe
that (iii) implies that

'ˇ ı '1
˛
1.W / is an open subset of '˛.U˛ \ Uˇ/, and (ii)
implies that this set is also open in Rn. It follows that
'1
˛ .V / \ '1
ˇ .W / D '1
˛

V \

'ˇ ı '1
˛
1.W /

is also a basis set, as claimed.
Each map '˛ is then a homeomorphism onto its image (essentially by definition),
so M is locally Euclidean of dimension n. The Hausdorff property follows easily
from (v), and second-countability follows from (iv) and the result of Exercise A.22,
because each U˛ is second-countable. Finally, (iii) guarantees that the collection
f.U˛;'˛/g is a smooth atlas. It is clear that this topology and smooth structure are
the unique ones satisfying the conclusions of the lemma.

Example 1.36 (Grassmann Manifolds). Let V be an n-dimensional real vector
space. For any integer 0  k  n, we let Gk.V / denote the set of all k-dimensional
linear subspaces of V . We will show that Gk.V / can be naturally given the struc-
ture of a smooth manifold of dimension k.n  k/. With this structure, it is called a
Grassmann manifold, or simply a Grassmannian. In the special case V D Rn, the
Grassmannian Gk

Rn
is often denoted by some simpler notation such as Gk;n or
G.k;n/. Note that G1

RnC1
is exactly the n-dimensional projective space RP n.

Examples of Smooth Manifolds
23
The construction of a smooth structure on Gk.V / is somewhat more involved
than the ones we have done so far, but the basic idea is just to use linear algebra
to construct charts for Gk.V /, and then apply the smooth manifold chart lemma.
We will give a shorter proof that Gk.V / is a smooth manifold in Chapter 21 (see
Example 21.21).
Let P and Q be any complementary subspaces of V of dimensions k and n  k,
respectively, so that V decomposes as a direct sum: V D P ˚ Q. The graph of any
linear map X W P ! Q can be identified with a k-dimensional subspace .X/  V ,
defined by
.X/ D fv C Xv W v 2 P g:
Any such subspace has the property that its intersection with Q is the zero subspace.
Conversely, any subspace S  V that intersects Q trivially is the graph of a unique
linear map X W P ! Q, which can be constructed as follows: let P W V ! P
and QW V ! Q be the projections determined by the direct sum decomposition;
then the hypothesis implies that P jS is an isomorphism from S to P . Therefore,
X D .QjS/ı.P jS/1 is a well-defined linear map from P to Q, and it is straight-
forward to check that S is its graph.
Let L.P IQ/ denote the vector space of linear maps from P to Q, and let
UQ denote the subset of Gk.V / consisting of k-dimensional subspaces whose
intersections with Q are trivial. The assignment X 7! .X/ defines a map
 W L.P IQ/ ! UQ, and the discussion above shows that  is a bijection. Let
' D 1W UQ ! L.P IQ/. By choosing bases for P and Q, we can identify
L.P IQ/ with M..n  k/  k;R/ and hence with Rk.nk/, and thus we can think of
.UQ;'/ as a coordinate chart. Since the image of each such chart is all of L.P IQ/,
condition (i) of Lemma 1.35 is clearly satisfied.
Now let .P 0;Q0/ be any other such pair of subspaces, and let P 0, Q0 be the cor-
responding projections and '0W UQ0 ! L.P 0IQ0/ the corresponding map. The set
'.UQ \ UQ0/  L.P IQ/ consists of all linear maps X W P ! Q whose graphs in-
tersect Q0 trivially. To see that this set is open in L.P IQ/, for each X 2 L.P IQ/, let
IX W P ! V be the map IX.v/ D v C Xv, which is a bijection from P to the graph
of X. Because .X/ D ImIX and Q0 D KerP 0, it follows from Exercise B.22(d)
that the graph of X intersects Q0 trivially if and only if P 0 ı IX has full rank.
Because the matrix entries of P 0 ı IX (with respect to any bases) depend continu-
ously on X, the result of Example 1.28 shows that the set of all such X is open in
L.P IQ/. Thus property (ii) in the smooth manifold chart lemma holds.
We need to show that the transition map '0 ı '1 is smooth on '.UQ \ UQ0/.
Suppose X 2 '.UQ \ UQ0/  L.P IQ/ is arbitrary, and let S denote the subspace
.X/  V . If we put X0 D '0 ı '1.X/, then as above, X0 D .Q0jS/ ı .P 0jS/1
(see Fig. 1.10). To relate this map to X, note that IX W P ! S is an isomorphism, so
we can write
X0 D .Q0jS/ ı IX ı .IX/1 ı .P 0jS/1 D .Q0 ı IX/ ı .P 0 ı IX/1:

Fig. 1.10 Smooth compatibility of coordinates on Gk.V /
To show that this depends smoothly on X, define linear maps AW P ! P 0,
B W P ! Q0, C W Q ! P 0, and DW Q ! Q0 as follows:
A D P 0ˇˇ
P ;
B D Q0ˇˇ
P ;
C D P 0ˇˇ
Q;
D D Q0ˇˇ
Q:
Then for v 2 P , we have
.P 0 ı IX/v D .A C CX/v;
.Q0 ı IX/v D .B C DX/v;
from which it follows that X0 D .B C DX/.A C CX/1. Once we choose bases
for P , Q, P 0, and Q0, all of these linear maps are represented by matrices. Because
the matrix entries of .A C CX/1 are rational functions of those of A C CX by
Cramer’s rule, it follows that the matrix entries of X0 depend smoothly on those of
X. This proves that '0 ı '1 is a smooth map, so the charts we have constructed
satisfy condition (iii) of Lemma 1.35.
To check condition (iv), we just note that Gk.V / can in fact be covered by finitely
many of the sets UQ: for example, if .E1;:::;En/ is any fixed basis for V , any
partition of the basis elements into two subsets containing k and n  k elements
determines appropriate subspaces P and Q, and any subspace S must have trivial
intersection with Q for at least one of these partitions (see Exercise B.9). Thus,
Gk.V / is covered by the finitely many charts determined by all possible partitions
of a fixed basis.
Finally, the Hausdorff condition (v) is easily verified by noting that for any two k-
dimensional subspaces P;P 0  V , it is possible to find a subspace Q of dimension
n  k whose intersections with both P and P 0 are trivial, and then P and P 0 are
both contained in the domain of the chart determined by, say, .P;Q/.
//
Manifolds with Boundary
In many important applications of manifolds, most notably those involving integra-
tion, we will encounter spaces that would be smooth manifolds except that they

Manifolds with Boundary
25
Fig. 1.11 A manifold with boundary
have a “boundary” of some sort. Simple examples of such spaces include closed
intervals in R, closed balls in Rn, and closed hemispheres in Sn. To accommodate
such spaces, we need to extend our definition of manifolds.
Points in these spaces will have neighborhoods modeled either on open subsets
of Rn or on open subsets of the closed n-dimensional upper half-space Hn  Rn,
defined as
Hn D
˚
x1;:::;xn
2 Rn W xn  0

:
We will use the notations IntHn and @Hn to denote the interior and boundary of Hn,
respectively, as a subset of Rn. When n > 0, this means
IntHn D
˚
x1;:::;xn
2 Rn W xn > 0

;
@Hn D
˚
x1;:::;xn
2 Rn W xn D 0

:
In the n D 0 case, H0 D R0 D f0g, so IntH0 D R0 and @H0 D ¿.
An n-dimensional topological manifold with boundary is a second-countable
Hausdorff space M in which every point has a neighborhood homeomorphic either
to an open subset of Rn or to a (relatively) open subset of Hn (Fig. 1.11). An open
subset U  M together with a map 'W U ! Rn that is a homeomorphism onto an
open subset of Rn or Hn will be called a chart for M, just as in the case of man-
ifolds. When it is necessary to make the distinction, we will call .U;'/ an interior
chart if '.U / is an open subset of Rn (which includes the case of an open subset
of Hn that does not intersect @Hn), and a boundary chart if '.U / is an open subset
of Hn such that '.U / \ @Hn ¤ ¿. A boundary chart whose image is a set of the
form Br.x/ \ Hn for some x 2 @Hn and r > 0 is called a coordinate half-ball.
A point p 2 M is called an interior point of M if it is in the domain of some
interior chart. It is a boundary point of M if it is in the domain of a boundary chart
that sends p to @Hn. The boundary of M (the set of all its boundary points) is
denoted by @M ; similarly, its interior, the set of all its interior points, is denoted by
IntM .
It follows from the definition that each point p 2 M is either an interior point or a
boundary point: if p is not a boundary point, then either it is in the domain of an in-
terior chart or it is in the domain of a boundary chart .U;'/ such that '.p/ … @Hn,

in which case the restriction of ' to U \ '1
IntHn
is an interior chart whose
domain contains p. However, it is not obvious that a given point cannot be simulta-
neously an interior point with respect to one chart and a boundary point with respect
to another. In fact, this cannot happen, but the proof requires more machinery than
we have available at this point. For convenience, we state the theorem here.
Theorem 1.37 (Topological Invariance of the Boundary). If M is a topological
manifold with boundary, then each point of M is either a boundary point or an
interior point, but not both. Thus @M and IntM are disjoint sets whose union is M .
For the proof, see Problem 17-9. Later in this chapter, we will prove a weaker
version of this result for smooth manifolds with boundary (Theorem 1.46), which
will be sufficient for most of our purposes.
Be careful to observe the distinction between these new definitions of the terms
boundary and interior and their usage to refer to the boundary and interior of a sub-
set of a topological space. A manifold with boundary may have nonempty boundary
in this new sense, irrespective of whether it has a boundary as a subset of some other
topological space. If we need to emphasize the difference between the two notions
of boundary, we will use the terms topological boundary and manifold boundary
as appropriate. For example, the closed unit ball xBn is a manifold with boundary
(see Problem 1-11), whose manifold boundary is Sn1. Its topological boundary as
a subset of Rn happens to be the sphere as well. However, if we think of xBn as
a topological space in its own right, then as a subset of itself, it has empty topo-
logical boundary. And if we think of it as a subset of RnC1 (considering Rn as a
subset of RnC1 in the obvious way), its topological boundary is all of xBn. Note that
Hn is itself a manifold with boundary, and its manifold boundary is the same as its
topological boundary as a subset of Rn. Every interval in R is a 1-manifold with
boundary, whose manifold boundary consists of its endpoints (if any).
The nomenclature for manifolds with boundary is traditional and well estab-
lished, but it must be used with care. Despite their name, manifolds with boundary
are not in general manifolds, because boundary points do not have locally Euclidean
neighborhoods. (This is a consequence of the theorem on invariance of the bound-
ary.) Moreover, a manifold with boundary might have empty boundary—there is
nothing in the definition that requires the boundary to be a nonempty set. On the
other hand, a manifold is also a manifold with boundary, whose boundary is empty.
Thus, every manifold is a manifold with boundary, but a manifold with boundary is
a manifold if and only if its boundary is empty (see Proposition 1.38 below).
Even though the term manifold with boundary encompasses manifolds as well,
we will often use redundant phrases such as manifold without boundary if we wish
to emphasize that we are talking about a manifold in the original sense, and man-
ifold with or without boundary to refer to a manifold with boundary if we wish
emphasize that the boundary might be empty. (The latter phrase will often appear
when our primary interest is in manifolds, but the results being discussed are just as
easy to state and prove in the more general case of manifolds with boundary.) Note
that the word “manifold” without further qualification always means a manifold

Manifolds with Boundary
27
without boundary. In the literature, you will also encounter the terms closed mani-
fold to mean a compact manifold without boundary, and open manifold to mean a
noncompact manifold without boundary.
Proposition 1.38. Let M be a topological n-manifold with boundary.
(a) IntM is an open subset of M and a topological n-manifold without boundary.
(b) @M is a closed subset of M and a topological .n  1/-manifold without
boundary.
(c) M is a topological manifold if and only if @M D ¿.
(d) If n D 0, then @M D ¿ and M is a 0-manifold.
I Exercise 1.39. Prove the preceding proposition. For this proof, you may use the
theorem on topological invariance of the boundary when necessary. Which parts re-
quire it?
The topological properties of manifolds that we proved earlier in the chapter have
natural extensions to manifolds with boundary, with essentially the same proofs as
in the manifold case. For the record, we state them here.
Proposition 1.40. Let M be a topological manifold with boundary.
(a) M has a countable basis of precompact coordinate balls and half-balls.
(b) M is locally compact.
(c) M is paracompact.
(d) M is locally path-connected.
(e) M has countably many components, each of which is an open subset of M and
a connected topological manifold with boundary.
(f) The fundamental group of M is countable.
I Exercise 1.41. Prove the preceding proposition.
Smooth Structures on Manifolds with Boundary
To see how to define a smooth structure on a manifold with boundary, recall that a
map from an arbitrary subset A  Rn to Rk is said to be smooth if in a neighbor-
hood of each point of A it admits an extension to a smooth map defined on an open
subset of Rn (see Appendix C, p. 645). Thus, if U is an open subset of Hn, a map
F W U ! Rk is smooth if for each x 2 U , there exists an open subset zU  Rn con-
taining x and a smooth map zF W zU ! Rk that agrees with F on zU \Hn (Fig. 1.12).
If F is such a map, the restriction of F to U \ IntHn is smooth in the usual sense.
By continuity, all partial derivatives of F at points of U \ @Hn are determined by
their values in IntHn, and therefore in particular are independent of the choice of
extension. It is a fact (which we will neither prove nor use) that F W U ! Rk is
smooth in this sense if and only if F is continuous, F jU \IntHn is smooth, and the
partial derivatives of F jU \IntHn of all orders have continuous extensions to all of U .
(One direction is obvious; the other direction depends on a lemma of Émile Borel,
which shows that there is a smooth function defined in the lower half-space whose
derivatives all match those of F on U \ @Hn. See, e.g., [Hör90, Thm. 1.2.6].)

Fig. 1.12 Smoothness of maps on open subsets of Hn
For example, let B2  R2 be the open unit disk, let U D B2 \ H2, and define
f W U ! R by f .x;y/ D
p
1  x2  y2. Because f extends smoothly to all of B2
(by the same formula), f is a smooth function on U . On the other hand, although
g.x;y/ D py is continuous on U and smooth in U \ IntH2, it has no smooth
extension to any neighborhood of the origin in R2 because @g=@y ! 1 as y ! 0.
Thus g is not smooth on U .
Now let M be a topological manifold with boundary. As in the manifold case,
a smooth structure for M is defined to be a maximal smooth atlas—a collection
of charts whose domains cover M and whose transition maps (and their inverses)
are smooth in the sense just described. With such a structure, M is called a smooth
manifold with boundary. Every smooth manifold is automatically a smooth mani-
fold with boundary (whose boundary is empty).
Just as for smooth manifolds, if M is a smooth manifold with boundary, any
chart in the given smooth atlas is called a smooth chart for M. Smooth coordinate
balls, smooth coordinate half-balls, and regular coordinate balls in M are defined
in the obvious ways. In addition, a subset B  M is called a regular coordinate
half-ball if there is a smooth coordinate half-ball B0 
 xB and a smooth coordinate
map 'W B0 ! Hn such that for some r0 > r > 0 we have
'.B/ D Br.0/ \ Hn;
'
 xB

D xBr.0/ \ Hn;
and
'

B0
D Br0.0/ \ Hn:
I Exercise 1.42. Show that every smooth manifold with boundary has a countable
basis consisting of regular coordinate balls and half-balls.
I Exercise 1.43. Show that the smooth manifold chart lemma (Lemma 1.35) holds
with “Rn” replaced by “Rn or Hn” and “smooth manifold” replaced by “smooth
manifold with boundary.”
I Exercise 1.44. Suppose M is a smooth n-manifold with boundary and U is an
open subset of M . Prove the following statements:
(a) U is a topological n-manifold with boundary, and the atlas consisting of all smooth
charts .V;'/ for M such that V  U defines a smooth structure on U . With this
topology and smooth structure, U is called an open submanifold with boundary.
(b) If U  IntM; then U is actually a smooth manifold (without boundary); in this
case we call it an open submanifold of M.
(c) IntM is an open submanifold of M (without boundary).

Problems
29
One important result about smooth manifolds that does not extend directly to
smooth manifolds with boundary is the construction of smooth structures on finite
products (see Example 1.8). Because a product of half-spaces Hn  Hm is not itself
a half-space, a finite product of smooth manifolds with boundary cannot generally
be considered as a smooth manifold with boundary. (Instead, it is an example of a
smooth manifold with corners, which we will study in Chapter 16.) However, we do
have the following result.
Proposition 1.45. Suppose M1;:::;Mk are smooth manifolds and N is a smooth
manifold with boundary. Then M1 Mk N is a smooth manifold with bound-
ary, and @.M1    Mk  N/ D M1    Mk  @N .
Proof. Problem 1-12.

For smooth manifolds with boundary, the following result is often an adequate
substitute for the theorem on invariance of the boundary.
Theorem 1.46 (Smooth Invariance of the Boundary).
Suppose M is a smooth
manifold with boundary and p 2 M . If there is some smooth chart .U;'/ for M
such that '.U /  Hn and '.p/ 2 @Hn, then the same is true for every smooth chart
whose domain contains p.
Proof. Suppose on the contrary that p is in the domain of a smooth interior chart
.U; / and also in the domain of a smooth boundary chart .V;'/ such that '.p/ 2
@Hn. Let  D ' ı  1 denote the transition map; it is a homeomorphism from
 .U \ V / to '.U \ V /. The smooth compatibility of the charts ensures that both 
and 1 are smooth, in the sense that locally they can be extended, if necessary, to
smooth maps defined on open subsets of Rn.
Write x0 D  .p/ and y0 D '.p/ D .x0/. There is some neighborhood W of y0
in Rn and a smooth function W W ! Rn that agrees with 1 on W \ '.U \ V /.
On the other hand, because we are assuming that  is an interior chart, there is
an open Euclidean ball B that is centered at x0 and contained in '.U \ V /, so 
itself is smooth on B in the ordinary sense. After shrinking B if necessary, we may
assume that B  1.W /. Then  ı jB D 1 ı jB D IdB, so it follows from the
chain rule that D..x// ı D.x/ is the identity map for each x 2 B. Since D.x/
is a square matrix, this implies that it is nonsingular. It follows from Corollary C.36
that  (considered as a map from B to Rn) is an open map, so .B/ is an open
subset of Rn that contains y0 D '.p/ and is contained in '.V /. This contradicts the
assumption that '.V /  Hn and '.p/ 2 @Hn.

Problems
1-1. Let X be the set of all points .x;y/ 2 R2 such that y D ˙1, and let M be
the quotient of X by the equivalence relation generated by .x;1/ 	 .x;1/
for all x ¤ 0. Show that M is locally Euclidean and second-countable, but
not Hausdorff. (This space is called the line with two origins.)

1-2. Show that a disjoint union of uncountably many copies of R is locally
Euclidean and Hausdorff, but not second-countable.
1-3. A topological space is said to be  -compact if it can be expressed as
a union of countably many compact subspaces. Show that a locally Eu-
clidean Hausdorff space is a topological manifold if and only if it is -
compact.
1-4. Let M be a topological manifold, and let U be an open cover of M .
(a) Assuming that each set in U intersects only finitely many others, show
that U is locally finite.
(b) Give an example to show that the converse to (a) may be false.
(c) Now assume that the sets in U are precompact in M; and prove the con-
verse: if U is locally finite, then each set in U intersects only finitely
many others.
1-5. Suppose M is a locally Euclidean Hausdorff space. Show that M is second-
countable if and only if it is paracompact and has countably many connected
components. [Hint: assuming M is paracompact, show that each component
of M has a locally finite cover by precompact coordinate domains, and ex-
tract from this a countable subcover.]
1-6. Let M be a nonempty topological manifold of dimension n  1. If M has
a smooth structure, show that it has uncountably many distinct ones. [Hint:
first show that for any s > 0, Fs.x/ D jxjs1x defines a homeomorphism
from Bn to itself, which is a diffeomorphism if and only if s D 1.]
1-7. Let N denote the north pole .0;:::;0;1/ 2 Sn  RnC1, and let S de-
note the south pole .0;:::;0;1/. Define the stereographic projection
 W Sn X fNg ! Rn by


x1;:::;xnC1
D .x1;:::;xn/
1  xnC1 :
Let z.x/ D .x/ for x 2 Sn X fSg.
(a) For any x 2 Sn X fNg, show that .x/ D u, where .u;0/ is the point
where the line through N and x intersects the linear subspace where
xnC1 D 0 (Fig. 1.13). Similarly, show that z.x/ is the point where the
line through S and x intersects the same subspace. (For this reason, z
is called stereographic projection from the south pole.)
(b) Show that  is bijective, and
1 
u1;:::;un
D .2u1;:::;2un;juj2  1/
juj2 C 1
:
(c) Compute the transition map z ı 1 and verify that the atlas consisting
of the two charts .Sn X fNg;/ and .Sn X fSg; z/ defines a smooth
structure on Sn. (The coordinates defined by  or z are called stereo-
graphic coordinates.)
(d) Show that this smooth structure is the same as the one defined in
Example 1.31.
(Used on pp. 201, 269, 301, 345, 347, 450.)

Problems
31
Fig. 1.13 Stereographic projection
1-8. By identifying R2 with C, we can think of the unit circle S1 as a subset of
the complex plane. An angle function on a subset U  S1 is a continuous
function  W U ! R such that ei.z/ D z for all z 2 U . Show that there exists
an angle function  on an open subset U  S1 if and only if U ¤ S1. For
any such angle function, show that .U;/ is a smooth coordinate chart for
S1 with its standard smooth structure. (Used on pp. 37, 152, 176.)
1-9. Complex projective n-space, denoted by CP n, is the set of all 1-dimensional
complex-linear subspaces of CnC1, with the quotient topology inherited
from the natural projection  W CnC1 X f0g ! CP n. Show that CP n is a
compact 2n-dimensional topological manifold, and show how to give it a
smooth structure analogous to the one we constructed for RP n. (We use the
correspondence

x1 C iy1;:::;xnC1 C iynC1
$

x1;y1;:::;xnC1;ynC1
to identify CnC1 with R2nC2.) (Used on pp. 48, 96, 172, 560, 561.)
1-10. Let k and n be integers satisfying 0 < k < n, and let P;Q  Rn be the
linear subspaces spanned by .e1;:::;ek/ and .ekC1;:::;en/, respectively,
where ei is the ith standard basis vector for Rn. For any k-dimensional sub-
space S  Rn that has trivial intersection with Q, show that the coordinate
representation '.S/ constructed in Example 1.36 is the unique .n  k/  k
matrix B such that S is spanned by the columns of the matrix
Ik
B

, where
Ik denotes the k  k identity matrix.
1-11. Let M D xBn, the closed unit ball in Rn. Show that M is a topological man-
ifold with boundary in which each point in Sn1 is a boundary point and
each point in Bn is an interior point. Show how to give it a smooth struc-
ture such that every smooth interior chart is a smooth chart for the standard
smooth structure on Bn. [Hint: consider the map  ı 1W Rn ! Rn, where
 W Sn ! Rn is the stereographic projection (Problem 1-7) and  is a pro-
jection from RnC1 to Rn that omits some coordinate other than the last.]
1-12. Prove Proposition 1.45 (a product of smooth manifolds together with one
smooth manifold with boundary is a smooth manifold with boundary).
